Facial recognition is on the cutting edge of the technological world. The countless possibilities presented by this new technology could have unforeseen consequences in regards to privacy. Freely giving a company or government the most unique and personal data about yourself should sound concerning, and when this new data is linked to pre-existing data streams collected about individuals the situation becomes more unsettling. Governments around the world have taken varying stances on the implementation of facial recognition technology, with some placing temporary moratoriums and others going forward with widespread implementation. In this crucial time it is important to consider and weigh the options of the various approaches taken around the world.
On one extreme end of the spectrum is China, where facial recognition technology has been in use for some time, but in 2019 it became part of everyday life for the Chinese people. Chinese citizens are able to purchase goods, and ride transit by simply looking into a camera. However, the primary government use of the facial recognition cameras is for surveillance. Just by seeing someone’s face Chinese authorities can retrieve an index of information including personal information, criminal history and even their ethnicity. The Chinese government is already known for their authoritarian actions and restrictions of free speech on the internet and in other arenas. So, clearly China has always valued their citizens' obedience and security at the expense of their personal freedoms. Many law abiding Chinese citizens who share no ill will towards their government might have no problem with facial recognition on top of pre existing modes of surveillance. However, their implementation seems to affect everyday life for average
 citizens. For example, their cameras track jaywalkers and instantly send them a fine via text as

well as project their image onto a large screen for public viewing. Currently, China provides the
rest of the world an extreme example of the potential implementations of facial recognition technology.
Several US cities have placed moratoriums on the installation of facial recognition
technology. San Francisco, which has long been on the technological forefront, is one city to do
so, citing apprehension about potential government abuse that could lead the country into an

Orwellian-like future. The European Union proposed a similar temporary ban on facial
recognition technology, calling for a five year moratorium on installing the technology in public places. It is difficult to argue against some of the clear advantages provided by facial recognition technology in regards to public safety, which is why these bans are not permanent. They rather aim to prevent widespread implementation, citing that “it would be careless to expand the use of this technology until all the necessary safeguards are in place.”3 This temporary ban seems to be a careful measured approach to limit implementation by government bodies.
These moratoriums preventing widespread implementation in the United States provide us with an important time period to consider who benefits from implementation. Widespread implementation would have the largest practical incentive for law enforcement and financial incentive for marketing and security companies. Two sectors whose main goal is controlling citizens’ behavior either for financial gain or security. Do we want to give even more agency to these companies who value our ability to blindly follow rules and impulsively spend money


 above anything else? On the other hand, would it not be good for police forces to do their job more easily and efficiently, and for advanced marketing techniques to drive economic growth? This dichotomy is why these moratoriums are necessary and why I believe the main concern regarding facial recognition technology comes down to the various places it could be implemented.
Society values privacy differently in various places. For example, since the tragedies on 9/11 our society has clearly emphasized the importance of air travel security. When flying one already gives up much of their personal information in exchange for safe travel, so adding the extra feature of facial recognition cameras would not alter the air travel experience much. On the other hand, implementation on streets would likely alter one’s day to day experience. Do we want a society that values following the rules so much that it punishes a minimum wage employee who jaywalked on the way to work out of fear of being late? An area that seems to be a middle ground between public streets and airports are large events like concerts and sporting events. ​Forty popular musical festivals have already pledged to ban the use of facial recognition technology sparked by public outcry from both concertgoers and musicians. Surveillance companies and venture capital firms have labelled music festivals as a major potential market. Potential uses at concerts include policing drug use and harassment as well as a way to skip long lines. Many performers support the ban out of fear that their shows could have less attendees if their fans are forced into a big brother like environment. However, the 92% of women and 30% of men who have reported experiencing sexual harassment at popular festival “Coachella” to the

campaign “Our Music My Body” would likely disagree with the ban. Major sports leagues in

 
the United States are yet to take a hard stance on implementation in their stadiums, where there are countless applications for marketing, security, and speeding up lines. ​Preventing a potential airline terrorist and a jaywalker are two extreme ends of the criminal spectrum, but this is where moratoriums proposed by cities like San Francisco allow us to consider the various locations facial recognition is most needed.
We need to recognize the potential slippery slope presented by widespread implementation and spend time carefully weighing the options. It is also paramount to make sure the technology is accurate as well as look at available data presented by facial recognition already in use. Existing data could provide a look into potential misuse by those in control of the technology, as well as technical problems that must be fixed before major rollout occurs. Companies with access to this data must have high level security because a potential data breach could have catastrophic implications, since facial data cannot be changed unlike password or credit card data. Currently, the lack of federal regulation on the use of facial recognition technology is astounding when one considers the implications of its use. It is clear that no matter what some sort of facial recognition technology implementation is inevitable. Pessimists can say that attempting to prevent implementation is futile. However, optimists must hope that more potential moratoriums will provide lawmakers time to weigh their options and decide how and where to best use this new Orwellian technology.